---
title: "Ohm's Law"
prompt: "State both microscopic and macroscopic versions of Ohm's Law and derive them from first principles."
tags: [physics, electromagnetism]
sources:
date_created: 2026-04-17
date_modified: 2026-04-17
---

Consider the force equation for electrostatics, $\vec{F} = q \vec{E}$. We now add collisions to this picture. Imagine a conductor with freely moving electrons; without the presence of an electric field, these electrons will be moving around randomly and their *average* velocity will be $\langle \vec{v} \rangle = \vec{v}_d = 0$. 

Define the characteristic time between collisions to be $\tau$. Then the average velocity picked up by a charge between each collision is

$$\Delta \vec{v} = \frac{q\vec{E}}{m} \tau.$$

Because the direction gets reset after each collision, we can think of this velocity change as the characteristic drift velocity of the electrons, i.e. $\vec{v}_d = \frac{q\tau}{m} \vec{E}$.

We can now write the current in terms of the drift velocity. Remember that the current density is simply the amount of charge multiplied by the velocity. For $n$ charge carriers with charge $q$, this is thus

$$\vec{J} = n q \vec{v}_d = \frac{nq^2 \tau}{m} \vec{E}.$$

We immediately see that the current density is proportional to the applied electric field, thus resulting in the *microscopic version of Ohm's Law:*

$$\vec{J} = \sigma \vec{E}, \quad \sigma = \frac{n q^2 \tau}{m}.$$

Here, $\sigma$ is the *conductivity* of the material, which quantifies how easily current is generated for a given electric field. It is larger when there are a large number of charge carriers/large amount of charge per carrier (i.e. there is simply a large amount of charge present) and when the timescale between collisions is large, because this allows the field to accelerate the charge carriers for a longer amount of time. It is smaller when the mass of each charge carrier is large, as this makes the charge carriers harder to accelerate.

We can also define the *resistivity* of a material as the inverse of the conductivity, $\rho \equiv 1/\sigma$. The resistivity thus measures how *hard* it is for current to be generated by a given electric field.

For the macroscopic case, consider a uniform straight wire of length $L$ and cross-sectional area $A$ with a constant electric field and thus a constant current density flowing through it. We can write the voltage across the wire as

$$V = \int_0^L \vec{E} \cdot d\vec{\ell} = EL,$$

and the current in the wire as $\vec{I} = \vec{J}A$. Using Ohm's law, we obtain

$$V = I\frac{\rho L}{A} = IR, \quad R \equiv \frac{\rho L}{A},$$

which is Ohm's law rewritten.